[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in our
last few videos we've been talking about higher
kinds of data structures where we combine
lists ordered sets multi sets and sets inside
each other we're going to give a very important
application of that kind of idea today turning
to things called arrays and matri es these are
very important kind of two-dimensional tables
usually occupied with mathematical objects often
numbers which arise in many many different places
in mathematics they really have a a very Central
role in linear algebra group Theory graph Theory
algebra Applied Mathematics and many other
things okay so sometimes we write them with
square brackets sometimes just kind of round
brackets like this um and there's different
terminology so the word array and the word
Matrix are often used interchangeably so
a natural question is is there a distinction
between arrays and matrices and for us there
will be okay this is not necessary but we
are going to think about arrays as looking
like this and matrices as looking like this and
there will be a difference today we're going to
be talking about arrays so a question is how
do we Define these things precisely without
requiring a prior theory of two-dimensional space
obviously there's a twodimensional aspect there
is a a length and width we're extending a certain
amount in certain direction certain amount in a
perpendicular Direction how do we say that without
going through all of ukian geometry or something
similar of course we could just write down a
picture like that and say that's a matrix or
that's an array but there's something a little
bit unsatisfactory about that right here's a
foundational series of lectures we want to pin
things down precisely what they are and not rest
too much on our physical intuition in fact we'
like to not rest on our physical intuition at
all we'd like to say things so precisely that even
a computer which is completely devoid say of any
physical or visual Intuition or understanding can
understand what we're talking about in this video
and the next we are going to be giving precise
definitions of array and Matrix and we're going
to treat these as separate but closely related
Concepts and our point of view has been motivated
by our discussion of these data structures that
we've been talking a lot about what we call loms
stands for lists ordered sets multi sets and
sets these are the four basic types of ways
of organizing things uh that we like to use okay
so let's start off with the idea of an array so
let's first of all fix a natural number n much
as we've been doing for all of the discussion of
these four basic types of data structures and
now we're going to define a j by K array from
n Define what that means so what it is is a list
of lists of a particular type type list of list
n k J so I remind you that list and K refers
to a fundamental kind of list with K elements
Each of which is a natural number from one up to n
those are the ingredients and there are K of them
strung together to form a list now this bigger
list contains as objects lists of this kind and
there are J of them so it's list of lists so let's
be specific for n = 5 and say J = 2 and K = 3 here
is an example of a list which has two entries
and this one here is a three list and this one
is another three list so this is a two list the
J would be two in this case a two list of three
lists this is what we would call a 2x3 array from
five because all of the entries are between 1 and
five and instead of writing the list of lists
like this we're going to write it in a sort of
array notation like this okay introducing
the two dimensional aspect where we have
the first list along the first row here as a
list the thing had to be separated by commas
and contained in a square bracket here we
just have the entries separated by spaces
just in the right positions and then the
second list 553 is spread out there in the
second row so that's what we do we take all the
lists in our list of lists and create a row for
each one of them so there's going to be as
many rows as there are entries to this big
list so this is an example of an array it's
actually a 2x3 array from five so if you've
done some computer science uh this will be very
familiar kind of concept because this is the way
a lot of programs think about what arrays or
matrices are as well we'll talk a little bit
about that at the end so here's another example
this array B is a 4X two array from three three
because all the entries are between one and
three so officially as a list of lists we
would write it down in list notation with
the square brackets and then we would list
the first row as a list a two list and then the
second row is another two list the third row is
another two list the fourth row as another two
list so we have a list of lists so it actually
contains four two lists from three so the four
two lists from three give us a 4X two array from
three so we're going to agree that these two
ways of writing B are equivalent that there
are just two different ways of visualizing
or expressing the same object this is just
another way of writing this thing here which
is a little bit more spread out a little bit
easier for us to appreciate because it has a
two-dimensional aspect we can sort of see more
clearly what's going on there are not a lot
of commas and brackets that might confuse us
but on the other hand your computer might be
a lot happier with this kind of object which
you can just read along and you'll can check
that all the brackets are in the right spots
there common was in all the right spots
and it knows exactly what it's talking
about so this B is a list whose elements are two
lists from three and there's four of them but we
also now going to introduce an alternate type
name because we don't always want to be talking
about this as the type of object we're going to
say that b is of type array 3A 4x2 so in keeping
with our general convention that the first spot
refers to where the actual elements are coming
from this case we're talking about elements from
three in other words numbers 1 2 or three and
then the second entry tells us something about
how big it is or its Dimensions this case it's
4X two 4X two this is a very efficient way of
describing this type which is probably easier
for us to understand than lists of lists but
really they're equivalent all right so this is
a new type of object and this B is an example
of that type let's introduce just a little bit
of notation so that we can talk a little bit
more efficiently about the various aspects of
these arrays so suppose that a is an array from
n of Dimensions J by K or a j by K array from n
then it has J rows so as a list of lists it's
a list of J lists where each of these objects
itself a k list from n and we can talk about
these lists which are the components of this
thing as the rows of the array so that fits in
keeping with our two-dimensional picture where
the actual rows are what we would usually
consider to be the rows of this array if we
look at any one row Or List say the I one AI then
we've said that that's going to be a k list from
n so it actually has K entries and sort of in a
consistent kind of way we could refer to those K
entries by a numbering system where the first
one is a sub i1 and then the next one is a sub
I2 all the way up to a sub i k so that these two
indices which are appearing here are telling us
first of all which list in here we're talking
about and then the second entry is telling us
which entry of that list we're talking about the
first entry the second entry the K entry so here
a sub i l has the property that I runs from 1 to
J telling us basically which list we're in and L
runs from 1 to K telling us which entry in that
particular list we're talking about and we will
use the word entry so these things here which are
actually numbers are going to be the entries of
a so then we can rather efficiently write
the array in this kind of notation with a
square brackets and a sub I L just
reminding ourselves that this is an
array whose typical entry is of form a
i l and if we know it's a j by K array
then we know that I is running from
1 to J and L is running from 1 to
K so it does take a little bit of getting used to
this kind of notation having these two Dimensions
the I going from one to J that would correspond
to going up and down in the rows of the array the
L going from 1 to K would represent going across
the columns in the array so this one here the I
is indexing the rows of the array and the L
the second entry is indexing The Columns of
the array so it's an excellent idea for students
to get on top of these notational conventions for
arrays because they figure in linear algebra
very prominently and in other areas as well
calculus too so a lot of mathematics has made a
little bit simpler if we are comfortable moving
around in an array and being able to find where
we are very precisely it's like just coordinates
but it's a little bit different because instead
of having X and Y coordinates which with the X
going first to the right and the Y going second
up in this case we're kind of doing the opposite
we're we're starting here and and the first
coordinate is kind of going down and then the
second coordinate is going across so there's a
little bit potential to get things mixed up with
the usual cartisian coordinate system of labeling
things in the XY plane so just to reinforce what
we've said let's have a look at this uh array
again so here's our array B it's an array from
three it's got Dimensions 4X two so it's a 4X two
array from three four rows two columns okay so the
actual lists which Form B are 1 three that's the
first row really the first list and then the next
one B2 is 22 the next one B3 would be 22 the next
one B4 would be 31 one and if we look at any one
particular row Or List say B1 there it is there
then the first entry is a one while the second
entry is three if we look in the second row B21
that's the first entry in the second row that's
a two and the second entry in the second row is
also a two similarly in the third row the first
entry in the third row is two the second entry
in the third row is also two when we get down to
the fourth row the first entry in the fourth row
is three the second entry in the fourth row is
one okay so this General framework now is quite
Pleasant it actually generalizes in in nice ways
so one way that we can generalize things is
by thinking about this n from which all our
elements are chosen we may not always want to
specify the range of elements that we're talking
about it's very nice when we do that it clarifies
very concretely where the entries are coming from
and if someone is reading this then they have a
a kind of a safe feeling because they know that
the entries are not going to get too big it's
kind of a guarantee that we're only going to go
up to three and no more but nevertheless in some
situations you want to maybe be more flexible and
maybe not say which natural number the entries are
going to be restricted to you might want to keep
that open okay so it's no big deal in doing that
we just modify the idea a little bit still employ
the same kind of notation same idea we're talking
about an array and in the first entry we're going
to specify the range of entries or elements so
if we put here Nat for natural numbers instead
of n like Nal 3 or Nal 5 then we're allowing the
possibility that the entries can be any objects
of this type here this is a 3x2 still specifying
this is a 3X two array the dimensions are the same
but now there's no particular bound on these
entries they could be rather big which might
be good might also be a nuisance I mean you know
if someone comes up with an entry there and that
entry is uh you know takes uh 3,000 kilometers
to write down in 12o type h you might not be that
happy about it all right that's an advantage
in having a specific bound that we know that
this thing is reasonable in principle when we talk
about Nat there well these things could be really
huge but of course when we give examples like
here typically we choose very small numbers so
that we're all comfortable and we uh confident
that we know what we're talking about once we
allow the possibility of having type like natural
numbers there well then it's not a big step to
enlarge that and think well we could put integers
there okay so we could think about arrays whose
elements are integers still of a particular
size so if there were integers here then this
could be a minus 114 this could be a zero this
could be a -71 or we could go one step further
we could talk about rational numbers so we could
put rat there that would tell us that the entries
have to be rational numbers so then there could
be a 17 over4 and a 3 over2 and a minus 21 over
97 and so on but again then there's no bound and
so in principle you could have rational numbers
with huge numerators and huge denominators and
effectively the thing could actually blow out
on you okay that's the the price you pay by not
bounding the range in which these elements are
coming from so it's a a trade-off all right so
that's very um very flexible kind of arrangement
that uh has a lot of different applications
but we can also extend it or generalize it
in another very interesting and important way
in fact the notion of an array generalizes to
higher Dimensions so let's have a look at that
so here's a more complicated kind of list it's a
list because there's square brackets and there's a
comma and this object is all one object and that's
also one object if we look at this thing here
well we see that's also a list whose entries are
two lists so this is a list of lists this is also
a list of lists so C is a list of lists of lists
array was a list of lists now we're talking about
a list of lists of lists that's what it is and if
we look more carefully at sort of the sizes well
we see that the maximum number is a seven so all
of the elements are from seven so we could say
this is a list whose size is first of all two
there are two objects and each of these objects
is itself a list of lists this is a list of three
lists whose objects are two lists from Seven
this is also a three list consisting of two
lists from Seven it's actually a two list of three
lists of two lists from Seven rather a mouthful
so that gets quite complicated to say it
that way even though it is rather precise
so we can introduce this shorthand
exactly in keeping with what we've
been doing in the two-dimensional case
and say that c is actually an array from
Seven of Dimension 2 by 3 by 2 2 * 3 * 2 so
it's a two list of three lists of two lists
from seven or just a 2x3x two array from
seven and so just as we've visualized a
3x4 array say in terms of a rectangular array
of numbers on a paper so we can visualize this
kind of higher dimensional array as entries
arranged in a three-dimensional box sort of
the threedimensional analog of a rectangle so
here's an example of a 4X 3x 2 array from five
it's name c so it's a 4x3 by two array that
means that it's got four entries and each of
those entries is a list with three entries and
each of those three entries is a list with two
entries so when when we read 4X 3x two we're
kind of reading from the outside so the big
picture is that there's four entries and
then we look at any one of the ingredients
it's got three entries then we look at any
one of those ingredients and we have two
entries all right so we could think about this in
a number of ways first of all we would recognize
that this first thing is exactly the kind of two
dimensional array that we've been talking about
this is a list of lists in other words this is
a two-dimensional array it's actually a 3X two
array and there it is right there it's the array
1 2 74 35 that's a more efficient way for us at
least to write down what's going on with this
first entry here this second entry this list
here for us is written 54 5431 a computer might
be much happier with this kind of description the
next entry 611 1622 and the final fourth entry
35 6471 so here's another way of thinking about
this array as four 3x2 arrays that's a 3x2 array
that's a 3x2 array there's another one there's
another one there's four of them all together and
now if we want to visualize that all at once well
we might think about a 3dimensional box and the
way to think about that at least one way is to
think about each one of these these arrays so
being stacked on top of each other in a third
dimension which is in different direction from the
dimensions that we're actually using in the array
there so here's a little box that perhaps helps
you visualize that so this first 3x2 array is
sitting there in that sort of first part of this
box the box is divided into four sections and uh
so you can imagine maybe having solid numbers
that occupy that first quarter of the box and
then that second quarter of the box that layer
there although we can't see it you can imagine
this array so put in there there's another six
numbers Behind These numbers and then behind
those there's this array and then in the final
sort of segment of this box there is the fourth
3x2 array so we have these four 3x2 arrays all
together filling out a 4X 3x two box so that's
a way of visualizing this three-dimensional array
I mentioned that this approach to arrays is very
traditional and is really following uh standard
practice in computer science so most programming
languages that deal with mathematical structures
at some point they want to talk about arrays or
matrices or something equivalent and so they
have various conven iions to sort of Define
these things and allow people to enter matrices or
arrays so for example Maple which is uh powerful
mathematical Computing environment coming from
Canada actually um we use that at uh unsw in
our first year courses so that has this kind
of convention for creating a matrix and it's
uh you'll see very familiar so Matrix and then
some brackets and then in here we have a list
and then there's a comma and then here there's
a list and there's another list that's exactly
the same kind of thing that we're doing and the
output is exactly the same as what we're doing
so except that we're not using the the word
Matrix and in this uh bracket but I mean the
idea of a list of lists and the way we write down
the list is exactly what we're doing uh python
also uses essentially this form Mathematica which
is Steven wolfram's brainchild and a very powerful
uh environment for doing mathematical Computing
uses something similar but the convention is
slightly different so there's braces here the
lists are represented by braces there are still
commas and otherwise it's very much the same and
the output is perhaps an array in round brackets
mat lab a very commonly used in engine engering
applications so for that you can input a matrix
rather efficiently like this 1 2 3 and then a
semicolon 4 five6 that will input that Matrix
there so the approach to arrays that we've um been
laying out here is uh very tried and true and will
be familiar to many of you but for those of you
to it's not familiar it's really important to
get on top of it there is something to be said
a little bit though about um this approach so
in all of these approaches what we're doing here
is we're emphasizing the rows a little bit above
the columns we're introducing a little bit of
asymmetry because we're agreeing that we're going
to read off and in fact specify these objects
row by row so if you'd rather think about things
in terms of columns by columns well then that
doesn't quite mesh with this or you'd have to take
a transpose to go from one to the other so it's
turns out that there's another way that's quite
interesting of specifying matrices and what we're
going to do is we're going to separate what we've
done today which is going to be the theory of
arrays from what we're going to do uh next video
which is going to be matrices and what we're going
to uh exploit is the fact that in fact we have
these other kinds of data structures around not
just lists we also have ordered sets and sets and
multi- sets we've already seen that there's some
kind of interesting connection between multisets
and lists and we're going to exploit that to show
you a rather novel way of thinking about matrices
and this novel way of thinking about matrices is
going to curiously open some doors for us that
are not so easy to find otherwise all right
so in our next video a slightly novel way of
thinking about matrices again firmly rooted
in this data structure orientation that we
are developing here I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening